This is a History 374 project for Dr. Anderson's
class in the fall of 1984. Speak to you there. And
we'll be talking with a man. His name is Vic Mazufi.
Vic Mazufi, who went to Peru in 1971 through 1974 as
a Peace Corps volunteer. And Vic, you want to tell
us a little bit about your background as far as your
education? Were you born maybe a little bit? Yeah,
I grew up in Northwest New Jersey and graduated
from high school and attended Georgetown
University in Washington. I was a language major
there. Spanish was my major. And on graduation,
I'd always been interested in Latin America. And I
saw Peace Corps as a vehicle sort of to travel and to
gain a little experience down there and perhaps
get a better idea of what I want to do in the future.
It was accepted upon application, and about a
month after graduation, we went into training. It
was a three-month training program, starting out
in Vermont, and then to Mexico and finally Hawaii
for some technical training in rice production.
And then about two weeks of in-country training in
Peru, and we were finally sent to our sites. OK, but
that was in 1971, correct? 1971, the latter part of
1971. OK, how did you go about getting there? Did
you fly? Did you drive? Oh, no. It was a group of
about 34 volunteers. And we were flown down. I
believe we left from Miami International Airport
and flew right to the airport. OK. What all did you
take? What did they tell you? Did they give you a
list of certain things you could take? Basic
clothing. I was in a coastal
semi-arid climate, so there wasn't a lot of heavy
clothing that needed to be taken. Technical
references, textbooks, and other material that
was provided during the Peace Corps training.
Things we need in the field later on as far as
technical material. A lot of extra reading
material just for the The times that you're alone
or you need to relax. But you have your supplies for
your kitchen and your bedding and all could be
acquired in the country, so there's no problem
with really burdening yourself with a whole lot of
extra baggage. Were you by a major city or anything
while you were there? I was about 10 minutes away
from a city of about 200,000 people, although I was
located in a town of about 3,000 to 4,000 people, a
small rural ag community. Okay. What was your
first impression as you... Maybe you got off the
plane and you got to your site. As I got to my site, a
lot of dust. A lot of dust. And it was hot, dry,
because it was on the desert. I think the whole
three years I was there, I believe it rained about a
total of maybe two inches in three years. Three
inches?
Yeah. Okay. What did your average day consist of
there in the rice? Well, it depends. When I first
got there, it was a matter of getting to know the
people, getting to know the farmers, the
problems, the people I was working with. The work
they involved over a period of time at first was
just getting familiar with the site. And then as I
became familiar with the site and the work I was
trying to do and the farmers I was working with, A
typical work day, say, six to eight months down the
road, once I felt at ease there, going out and
visiting individual farmers in the field,
discussing with them some of the work we've been
doing and what problems they may be having, and
trying to work out some kind of a solution, make
formative recommendations to whatever problem
they may have had. Is there any isolated
experiences that may be good or bad that stick out
in your mind? that you carry with you? I wouldn't
say any particular isolated incidents. A lot of
minor things, but nothing that really would stand
out. Just the overall experience and the sense of
accomplishment after the job is done. We haven't
gone into it yet, but the work I was actually doing
was the introduction of an improved rice variety
to the local rice farmers in the Santa Valley.
Over a period of three years after installing test
plots and the farmers learning how to grow this
particular variety and seeing the results it had
and that it was outperforming the traditional
variety that had been growing for many years,
seeing that they were changing over to this new
variety we were trying to introduce and accepting
it and growing it and having very good results, the
yield was increased. not double, but at least by a
good 30 to 40 percent. The grain quality was much
better than the traditional variety they'd been
growing. The vegetative period was a lot shorter,
so it gave them time for a double crop. They were
cropping, intercropping with peas and beans, so
their income was increased. And just the fact that
I saw a lot of people responding to the efforts
we've been making in introducing this variety,
and planting it, and eventually the variety was,
had replaced the traditional variety by the time I
had left. It was a predominant variety in that
valley. Did the farmers, did they welcome you into
their fields? Were they kind of... They welcomed
me, but with a certain bit of skepticism. I was a
Yankee, a young gringo. And sometimes they use
that term. Did they respect your education? Yeah,
but they still wanted me to prove myself. And I
learned as I went. I made a few mistakes in the
beginning. And I tried to disguise them as well as I
could. But I think overall, over time, the
confidence that I displayed, I think they
accepted it. And they came to trust me and to
believe that I had the confidence. to show them a
few new ideas or techniques. Did they believe in
American education? The thing is, yeah, they had
an assumption that Americans, yes, were
well-educated and should know what they were
talking about, but it comes down to an individual
one-to-one relationship where you have to prove
yourself to that farmer and gain their trust. Once
you gain the trust, then Whether they respect you
or not will come, but they have to trust you first
before they'll open up and you can be more sincere
with them and try to teach if you can. But the thing
is, the whole time I was there, I think I was
learning more from them than I was actually able to
teach. But it's the ideas, the... techniques that
i was picking up from the whole spectrum of farmers
in that area and getting an idea of the proper
techniques to use and then focusing on farmers
that had problems individual farmers that were
not as managing the crops as well as the better ones
and bringing those better ideas to the farmers
that i saw were marginal that that needed help okay
what was the basic uh economy that time in peru was
it pretty poor Did a few people control a lot of the
aristocratic? Yeah, it was, but just before I got
there. But I got there soon as the, there was a
military coup in 1968. And it was a leftist
military dictatorship that took over the
country. And what they tried to do was expropriate
a lot of the large land holdings and turn it back
over to the former owners in the form of a
agricultural production co-op. They did this not
only in agriculture, but in industry. The steel
industry was expropriated from private
ownership and turned back over to the workers. The
fishing industry was one of the biggest
industries in Peru, and a lot of the light industry
as well. And it was in a state of flux the whole time I
was there. New owners, a lot of government
intervention, poor planning, poor management.
Production went down a lot in the steel industry,
the fishing industry. Not only because of the
management problems, but because of changes in
weather patterns and ocean currents. The
anchovy, which was the main fish that they were
harvesting, sort of disappeared for a few years.
And they lost a lot of their foreign exchange
because of that. And agriculture production went
down because of the co-ops. A lot of the social and
technical problems they were having and the
transformation of ownership. The economy was
relatively poor. It's a developing country and a
relatively poor country. Is there a significant
class structure? Yeah, there was. Yes, there's a
very small class structure. upper class and a very
large lower class with a minimal middle class
which this is mainly viewed your merchants and
retailers and some of your industrial workers but
it's the bulk of the population is agricultural
and poor okay did any problems that was that were
occurring in chile right uh at that time period
down there with uh allende Did that affect you in
any way in Peru? Were the people aware of it in Peru?
Yes, it came out in the Peruvian press. And the
press wasn't controlled, but the press was
favorable towards the government. And being
elected as government, they were aligned, if not
politically, then idealistically with
Allende's government. And when Allende was
overthrown, it came out that there were CIA
implications helping to overthrow him. a lot of
people became, well, they always suspected, a lot
of people suspected that maybe the Peace Corps
volunteers were involved with the CIA. And
because of the events in Chile, It just brought up
to the surface a little more that perhaps the CIA
may be getting involved in improving politics,
and we could have been perhaps puppets. It was in a
lot of conversations that came out. Yeah, yeah,
but you're involved, and it took a lot of
convincing, and I'm not sure we convinced
everyone, but I think a lot of people... Once they
gained that trust... Yeah, I think they realized
and tried to quite the more radical elements that
were in the field with us working that, you know,
just a guy doing a job and let's not harass him too
much. But there were always some that did actually
believe that we worked. But I doubt, and I can't say
for sure, but it's always been Peace Corps policy
never to be involved in political activities. And
being involved with the CIA would jeopardize
Peace Corps operations throughout the world. How
about just interested in the cocaine business
there in Peru? Was it still a major export? No, no.
When I was there, cocaine really hadn't gained as
much popularity as it has now. The coca leaf, which
is cultivated in the mountains,
is utilized a lot by the laborers, a lot by the
Indians in the mountains. A lot of people, a lot of
the farmers I worked with, I'd go out to the fields
and they'd have a mouthful, like we have here in
Texas, they'd have a mouthful of tobacco or
Copenhagen, they'd have a mouthful of coca
leaves. And it didn't have the same effect as
purified cocaine, but it was a narcotic and I guess
it allowed them to work a little bit harder and not
experience hunger and thirst. It was, but it
wasn't. As a matter of fact, the trade in coca
leaves was legal at the time. Okay. Upon your
completion of your three-year tour, I guess, or
whatever you could call it, did you feel that you,
was it a success in your life? Did you, or I guess put
it this way, what kind of impact did it play on your
life? Did you feel like you had done something?
Yeah, yeah, definitely. I... A lot of Peace Corps
programs in different countries, especially
when Peace Corps initially started, they'd send a
volunteer out to the field in an unstructured job.
They had a kind of a catch-all phrase for the work
they did, which was community development. And it
was up to the volunteer himself to either build a
school or teach English or maybe get small
community gardens started, vegetable gardens.
Whereas my job was more structured, and we had a
definite a job to do and a definite goal to obtain. I
think by the time I left, and I've been back there
since, I've seen the results of it. Most of the
farmers have been. Most, if not all, the farmers in
that area do grow the variety that I introduced
when I was there. And that's a great satisfaction.
I've seen the results. And not only that, before I
went into Peace Corps, I was sort of undecided
about what I wanted to do in the future. It kind of
got me more interested in agriculture. As a
result, I came back to Hanover and got my master's
in ag. I kind of have a profession I want to pursue
now. Well, going back to the start, back in the
early 60s, Kennedy initiated the Peace Corps
program. When did you first hear about the Peace
Corps? I mean, when you very first heard about it
was the Kennedy idealism period. Yeah, I'd heard
about it since, you know, since junior high
school, I was aware of it. And throughout college,
you would hear more because there were recruiters
on campus, and you were running into people who had
been overseas, had been in the Peace Corps, and
some of those had very favorable experiences. And
I thought it, you know, it started getting me
interested. And, yeah, at the time, people, a lot
of the people... They were very idealistic, and
they thought maybe they could do something to
change the status in society, if not overseas. And
I think that's one of the reasons Kennedy created
it. He saw there was a
desire among young people to do something besides
worry about themselves. And he gave them an outlet
to do that. He challenged them or something. I
guess you could call it that. The purpose of the
Peace Corps wasn't only to give young people an
opportunity to do something a little extra, but we
were sort of like goodwill ambassadors. I mean,
you gave people in the Third World an opportunity
to meet Americans. This common, ordinary
American youth, you got the idea that you weren't
the spies and the exploiters and the capitalists
that the Third World had made us out to be,
especially the radical types in the Third World. I
think, for the most part, volunteers betray that,
that we're willing to help and we're not simply out
for a buck, because the pay we got It was just a
subsistence allowance. You know, you got by. It
took it easy. You could save a little, but that
wasn't the purpose. It was just enough to allow you
to live comfortably. That's about it. And I think a
lot of people, at least from my experience, I don't
have to say they were impressed with the Americans
that they were dealing with. I think it was a
favorable experience on both parts, mine and
theirs. I got to be friends with an awful lot of
crewmates in the area I was working, and I think the
respect that was generated was mutual.
Okay, Vic, upon your three years there, did you
feel like you had accomplished what you set out to
do, or did you feel like you maybe needed six months
to a year to maybe accomplish what you set out to do?
Well, basically, I feel I accomplished what I set
out to do. But because I've been there three years
and the experience gained over those three years,
I think I could have done perhaps a little better as
far as
providing technical assistance to these
farmers. But
after being there three years, I had to apply for a
fourth year extension. Soon after that
application was made, we were notified by the
Peruvian government that we'd have to leave the
country. We were given 90 days. The Peace Corps
program was given 90 days to leave the country. And
it was, I believe it was a political decision.
Maybe the events in Chile had something to do with
it, maybe not. But in 1974, there was a lot of talk
about especially in the press and political
cartoons, about the Peace Corps being involved
with the CIA. And the Proving Government seemed to
be one over the country of all foreign influence.
The Rotary Club, the Boy Scouts, and the Peace
Corps was one of the biggest organizations that
was first asked to lead. And it came as a shock to
myself and to the program in general, most of the
people involved. A lot of volunteers were in
service a year or two, and seeing results of the
work they were doing and having to leave it at
midstream was disheartening, to say the least.
And, well, there was nothing we could do. Requests
were made, but all immediately turned down by the
Peruvian government. So I left with a bit of
disappointment in not being able to spend a fourth
year there and perhaps doing a bit more in the field
I was working. But that was just the way it turned
out. OK, one last question for the people out
there. The Peace Corps as a whole, you think it's a
worthwhile program? Did you get a lot out of it? You
think that it's just a good program? Yeah, I do,
especially now because they're not recruiting
the generalists they were when the Peace Corps
initially started. They want people with a skill
or a trait that they can teach. If not, they want
people with a technical background, a good
college education in agriculture or some
engineering field, because a lot of the countries
are requesting people with more technical
skills. I'd recommend Peace Corps to anybody
that's interested in working overseas. It was a
great cross-cultural experience for me, and I
think it would be for anyone. At the same time, It
tests your abilities, your ability at innovation
and resourcefulness and adapting. Because
that's a big part of it. It's the ability to adapt to
the global conditions and the people and the
culture you're working in. And it's a necessity if
you're going to be successful.
Well, Vic, I appreciate you taking the time and
letting me interview you. And I think this is going
to be a worthwhile pay to let people listen to it,
and learn a little bit about the Peace Corps and
Peru itself. Appreciate it, dude. Thank you, Jim.